Class: [[CSE 16]]
Subject: #computer-science 
Date: 2024-11-13
Teacher: **Prof. Musacchio**

# Proving Non-Conditional Statements

## Non-Constructive Proof
- [[non-constructive]] proofs prove an example exists without actually giving it.

### Example
- *Proposition* There exist irrational numbers $x, y$ for which $xy$ is rational.
	- *Proof*. Let $x = \sqrt2^\sqrt2$ and $y = \sqrt2$. We know $y$ is irrational, but it is not clear whether $x$ is rational or irrational. On one hand, if $x$ is irrational, then we have an irrational number to an irrational power that is rational:
	$$x^y = {(\sqrt2^\sqrt2)}^\sqrt2 = \sqrt2^{\sqrt2\sqrt2} = \sqrt2^2 = 2$$
	- On the other hand, if $x$ is rational, then $y^y = \sqrt2^\sqrt2 = x$ is rational. Either way, we have an irrational number to an irrational power that is rational.

## Constructive Proof
- [[constructive]] proofs display an explicit example that proves the theorem

### Example
- *Proposition* There exist irrational numbers $x, y$ for which $xy$ is rational. 
	- Proof. Let $x = \sqrt2$ and $y = log_2 9$. Then:
	$$x^y = \sqrt2^{log_29} = \sqrt2^{log_23^2} = ({\sqrt2^2})^{2log_23} = ({\sqrt2^2})^{log_23} = s^{log2_3} = 3$$
- *As* 3 is rational, we have shown that $xy = 3$ is rational. We know that $x = \sqrt2$ is irrational. The proof will be complete if we can show that $y = log_2 9$ is irrational. 
- *Suppose* for the sake of contradiction that $log2_9$ is rational, so there are positive integers $a$ and $b$ for which $ab = log2_9$. 
- This means $2^{a|b} = 9$, so $(2^{a|b})^b = 9b$, which reduces to $2a = 9b$. But $2a$ is even, while $9b$ is odd (because it is the product of the odd number 9 with itself $b$ times). 
- This is a contradiction; the proof is complete.